Human Abduction for Solving Puzzles to Find Logically Explicable Rules to Discriminate Two Picture Groups Ostracized Each Other: An Ontology-based Model
Jisha Maniamma and Hiroaki Wagatsuma

Human intelligence relying on the brain information processing has two aspects of implicit memory and explicit memory functions. A possible hypothesis is that the human intelligence is a consequence of the fusion of those two aspects and then a question is addressed as to how the flexibility of making a frame of thinking depending on the context is reconstructed by the fusion. In the assumption that an autonomous classifier provides primitive labels indicating parts in a picture and a generalizer to represent the whole in an abstract way, the problem that remains unsolved is how semantic information can be coordinated to reach the conclusion to connect parts and the whole. Bongard problems question such an issue in the form of logical picture puzzles to request to seek the unique minimum description of pictures to discriminate two groups, throughout an abductive reasoning. In the present study, we introduced methods of the semantic web technology to treat a hierarchical semantic information arisen in the abduction and the logical reasoning to obtain the conclusion and then proposed a computational model for solving the problems by using an architecture of hierarchical abductions. Possible combinations of primitive descriptions like ‘circle in a triangle’ is arisen as a test hypothesis to represent them commonly and then it is verified whether it matches all pictures totally in each group. The tested hypotheses from two groups are compared and it will be the solution if there are logically different, such as ‘circle in a triangle’ v.s. ‘triangle in a circle.’ Our computer experiment showed that ten selected Bongard problems were solved in the proposed framework. It indicates that the semantic information coordinator works well to solve a type of the frame problem, by coupling with autonomous classifier and generalizer. The framework may contribute to the design of the general artificial intelligence in part, especially on coordination against autonomy in semantics.